REVIEW ARTICLE
ECG Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation of Acute Coronary
Syndromes
Yochai Birnbaum, M.D.,∗,† James Michael Wilson, M.D.,∗,† Miquel Fiol, M.D.,‡
Antonio Bay ´es de Luna, M.D.,§ Markku Eskola, M.D., ¶and Kjell Nikus, M.D. ¶
From the∗The Section of Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; †Texas Heart Institute, Saint Luke’s
Episcopal Hospital, Houston, TX; ‡Hospital Universitario Son Espases, Unidad Coronaria, Palma de Mallorca,
Spain; §Institute Catal `aC i `encies Cardiovasculars, Barcelona, Spain; and ¶Department of Cardiology, Heart Center,
Tampere University Hospital and University of Tampere, Medical School, Tampere, Finland
In acute coronary syndromes, the electrocardiogram (ECG) provides important information about
the presence, extent, and severity of myocardial ischemia. At times, the changes are typical and
clear. In other instances, changes are subtle and might be recognized only when ECG recording
is repeated after changes in the severity of symptoms. ECG interpretation is an essential part of
the initial evaluation of patients with symptoms suspected to be related to myocardial ischemia,
along with focused history and physical examination. Patients with ST-segment elevation on their
electrocardiogram and symptoms compatible with acute myocardial ischemia/infarction should be
referred for emergent reperfusion therapy. However, it should be emphasized that a large number of
patients may have ST-elevation without having acute ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome, while
acute ongoing transmural ischemia due to an abrupt occlusion of an epicardial coronary artery
may occur in patients with ST-elevation less than the thresholds deﬁned by the guidelines. Up-
sloping ST-segment depression with positive T waves is increasingly recognized as a sign of regional
subendocardial ischemia associated with severe obstruction of the left anterior descending coronary
artery. Widespread ST-segment depression, often associated with inverted T waves and ST-segment
elevation in lead aVR during episodes of chest pain, may represent diffuse subendocardial ischemia
caused by severe coronary artery disease. In case of hemodynamic compromise, urgent coronary
angiography has been increasingly recommended for these patients.
Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2014;19(1):4–14
acute coronary syndrome; electrocardiogram; ST-segment elevation; ST-segment depression; risk
stratiﬁcation; triage; myocardial infarction
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) are caused by
an imbalance between myocardial oxygen demand
and blood flow, which may be caused by either an
acute reduction of blood supply or an increase in
demand that cannot be matched by augmentation
of blood flow. The most severe manifestation of
ACS is acute reduction of blood flow, caused
by an occlusive blood clot that is formed on a
ruptured atherosclerotic plaque in an epicardial
coronary artery. This usually leads to complete or
almost complete obliteration of the coronary artery
lumen, resulting in acute transmural ischemia that
involves all layers of the myocardium with necrosis
Address for correspondence: Kjell Nikus, M.D., Heart Center, Cardiology Department, Tampere University Hospital, Biokatu 6, 33520
Tampere, Finland. Fax: +358-3 3116 4157; E-mail: kjell.nikus@sydankeskus.ﬁof the involved tissue, if reperfusion does not
occur rapidly. Other causes of an abrupt coronary
artery occlusion are coronary embolus, spasm, and
dissection of the aorta with involvement of the
orifice of the main coronary artery or dissection
of the coronary artery itself. Occasionally, total
occlusion of an epicardial coronary artery does not
lead to transmural ischemia due to the presence
of residual flow via collateral circulation. In many
instances, the blood clot overlying the ruptured
plaque does not completely block the blood flow.
Dynamic changes in the size of the thrombus
with distal embolization of platelet aggregates and
C/circlecopyrt2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
DOI:10.1111/anec.12130
4
A.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACSr5
clots and secretion of vasoactive substances lead
to cyclic flow variations with repeat episodes
of subendocardial ischemia (so-called unstable
angina) that may lead to myocardial cellular injury
(acute myocardial infarction; AMI). As mentioned
above, ACS may be caused by abrupt increase
of demand (tachyarrhythmia, sepsis, significant
increase in afterload), usually in combination with
limited ability to increase coronary flow (presence
of fixed coronary narrowing due to preexisting
coronary artery disease, vasoconstriction due to
medication, hypotension, severe anemia, etc.). This
may occur even without formation of blood clots
on ruptured atherosclerotic plaques.
Obviously, patients with severe ischemia leading
to ongoing myocardial necrosis should be rapidly
diagnosed, as these patients may benefit from ur-
gent reperfusion therapy (preferentially by primary
percutaneous coronary intervention; p-PCI). On
the other hand, most patients with incomplete
occlusion of the coronary artery may be stabilized
first with medical therapy before a decision is
made to refer them for coronary angiography and
revascularization.
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL ISCHEMIA
AND THE ECG
Acute myocardial ischemia may affect all
components of the electrical activation of the
heart, including the P wave, the PR interval, the
QRS complex, the ST segment, and the T and
U waves. The most dramatic ECG manifestation
of acute transmural myocardial ischemia is ST-
segment elevation (STE) in the leads facing the
ischemic zone and ST-segment depression (STD)
in the leads facing to the anatomically opposite
myocardial segments (Fig. 1). On the other hand,
subendocardial ischemia may cause STD in the
ECG leads facing the involved zone. It is also
evident that the ECG may be normal or only show
minor changes, especially if the patient is asymp-
tomatic when the ECG is recorded. Indeed, the
Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ (FTT) Collaborative
Group, analyzing 58,600 patients with suspected
AMI, who were randomized to fibrinolytic therapy
versus control in 9 randomized trials, concluded
that fibrinolytic therapy was beneficial only in
patients, presented within 12 hours of onset of
symptoms, whose presenting ECG showed STE or
bundle branch block.1By definition, “prolongednew STE (e.g., >20 minutes), particularly when
associated with reciprocal STD, usually reflects
acute coronary occlusion and results in myocardial
injury with necrosis.”2This and other data have led
to the paradigm that STE on the presenting ECG
in patients with compatible symptoms represents
“ongoing transmural myocardial ischemia” mandat-
ing urgent reperfusion therapy, whereas patients
without STE can be treated, at least initially,
with more conservative approach, unless they are
hemodynamically unstable. Therefore, together
with focused history and physical examination,
the ECG has gained a crucial role in the initial
assessment and triage of patients with symptoms
compatible with chest pain. Current guidelines
recommend that an ECG should be performed
and interpreted by an experienced physician
within 10 minutes of Emergency Department
arrival.3Moreover, prehospital transmission (or
interpretation) of the ECG is encouraged to reduce
the time from first medical contact to reperfusion
therapy (activation of the catheterization laboratory
before the patient arrives to the hospital). In
the most recent European guidelines, the authors
point out that some patients with acute coronary
occlusion may have an initial ECG without STE.4
They recommended repeated ECG recordings or
monitoring of the ST segment, and also, the use of
additional posterior chest wall leads V 7–V9leads.
However, it should be remembered that we
should identify and treat “ongoing transmural
myocardial ischemia” that usually manifests as STE
and not the ST segment per se. Many individuals
have some degree of STE at baseline without
having acute myocardial ischemia. Conditions
other than acute myocardial ischemia may cause
dynamic ST changes. Moreover, persons with
baseline nonischemic STE may present with chest
pain; some will be diagnosed with noncardiac pain,
some will end up with non-STE acute coronary
syndrome (NSTE-ACS) and some with STE-ACS.
The guidelines have set thresholds for STE based
on epidemiological studies. As a large number
of healthy persons (especially young males) have
mild STE in leads V 2–V3,ac u t o f fo f0 . 2 5m V
in men <40 years, 0.2 mV for men ≥40 years,
and≥0.15 mV in women in these leads was
recommended.2For all other leads, the cut-
point is 0.1 mV. The authors point out that the
ECG by itself is usually insufficient to diagnose
acute myocardial ischemia or infarction, since ST
deviation may be observed in other conditions,
6rA.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACS
Figure 1. Inferior and lateral STE-ACS. There is ST elevation in the leads II, III, aVF, and V 4–V6. Leads I and aVL
show reciprocal ST depression. ST elevation in leads V 1–V2represents lateral “mirror-image” ST deviation. There is
Sclarovsky–Birnbaum grade III of ischemia in leads III, aVF, and V 6.
such as left ventricular hypertrophy or left bundle
branch block (LBBB). Indeed, nonischemic STE of
more than 0.2 mV is common in leads V 2–V3in
both left ventricular hypertrophy and LBBB. To
raise the suspicion of STE-ACS, STE above the
threshold should be seen in at least two adjacent
ECG leads. However, it should be emphasized
that a large number of patients may have STE
above this threshold without having acute STE-
ACS, while acute ongoing transmural ischemia
due to an abrupt occlusion of an epicardial
coronary artery may occur in patients with STE
less than the accepted thresholds. This may
be the case with small QRS complexes in the
affected leads, especially in inferior STE-ACS,
with myocardial protection due to preconditioning
or residual collateral circulation, etc. New or
presumably new LBBB has been considered an ST-
segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
equivalent, but most cases of LBBB at time of
presentation are “not known to be old” because
no prior electrocardiogram (ECG) is available for
comparison. According to recent guidelines, new
or presumably new LBBB at presentation is usually
not caused by acute epicardial coronary occlusion,
may interfere with STE analysis, and should not
be considered diagnostic of STEMI-equivalent in
isolation.3
The differential diagnosis of nonischemic STE is
diverse (Table 1).5, 6In many instances, typical ECG
patterns can easily be recognized by an experienced
electrocardiographer, such as prominent J-pointsTable 1. Common Patterns of Nonischemic
ST Elevation
STE secondary to left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
STE secondary to conduction defect (left bundle
branch block and nonspeciﬁc intraventricular
conduction delay (IVCD)
Early repolarization pattern (notched J-point mainly in
anterolateral leads)
Normal variant of STE (nonischemic ST elevation
mainly V 2–V3)
Concave STE
Old myocardial infarction/aneurysm
Spontaneously reperfused myocardial infarction
Pericarditis
Brugada syndrome
Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome (preexcitation)
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (apical ballooning
syndrome)
Hypercalcemia
Hyperkalemia
with STE in the lateral leads (Fig. 2)—a pattern
typical for early repolarization—or diffuse STE
with STD in leads aVR and V 1and depression
of the PR segment, a pattern compatible with
acute pericarditis (Fig. 3). However, in many
other instances there might be more than one
explanation for the STE and precise diagnosis
on presentation cannot be done. For example,
hypertension is a known risk factor for coronary
artery disease. Long-term hypertension could
induce left ventricular hypertrophy with STE in
leads V 1–V3(Fig. 4). However, patients with
A.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACSr7
Figure 2. The early repolarization pattern with J-point and ST-segment elevations in the leads I, aVL, and V 4–V6.
Figure 3. Acute pericarditis with ST elevation in the leads I, II, III, aVF, V 3–V6with ST depression in aVR and V 1.
PR-segment depression in the leads aVF and V 4–V6and PR-segment elevation in lead aVR is also typical of pericarditis.
ECG signs of left ventricular hypertrophy may
present with anterior STEMI. It is commonly
believed that comparison to previous ECG tracing
will enable making the right diagnosis. However,
in many instances nonischemic STE also shows
dynamic changes. For example, STE due to early
repolarization may not be seen at fast heart rate
or after hyperventilation, STE due to a ventricular
aneurysm increases with faster heart rate, etc. In
these cases, the clinician may rely on the history
and physical examination or order a transthoracic
echocardiogram to facilitate the decision whether
to proceed with acute reperfusion therapy.
The reported percentage of patients with false
activation of the p-PCI protocol because of
nonischemic STE varies from 14% to over 40%,5, 7–9
although it has recently been suggested that a <5%rate of inappropriate p-PCI activation represents a
reasonable goal.10It seems that this percentage is
highly dependent on the prevalence of abnormal
baseline ECGs in the population served by the
individual medical center. It has to be also
remembered that not all patients with positive
cardiac markers who present with STE and found
to have angiographically proven coronary artery
disease, even with significant stenosis, have true
STE-ACS. Some may have NSTE-ACS with baseline
nonischemic STE, so-called “pseudo-STEMI.”11In
adjudicated true STE-ACS, the pattern of ST-
segment deviation should be compatible with
the site of occlusion of the coronary artery and
resolution of the ECG changes is expected if
timely reperfusion therapy is successful. Aborted
STEMI adds to the confusion: if the coronary artery
8rA.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACS
Figure 4. The ECG shows ST elevation in the inferior and precordial leads, most prominently in the leads V 1–V4. Deep
S waves in the leads V 1–V4and a high R waves in I and aVL indicate left ventricular hypertrophy.
occlusion recanalizes rapidly, either spontaneously
or with reperfusion therapy, even transmural
ischemia due to complete occlusion of an epicardial
artery may resolve without (significant) elevation
of cardiac markers.12Stress-induced (takotsubo)
cardiomyopathy may present with STE, fulfilling
reperfusion criteria, on the 12-lead ECG. By
definition, these patients have neither significant
culprit artery stenosis nor intracoronary thrombi.
However, preexisting coronary artery disease
does not exclude the possibility of stress-induced
cardiomyopathy in an individual patient, resulting
in differential diagnostic challenges.4
ST-ELEVATION ACUTE CORONARY
SYNDROME
Acute transmural ischemia may affect the QRS-
complex, the ST-segment, and the T-wave morphol-
ogy. The pattern of ECG changes enables the reader
to estimate the site of coronary artery occlusion,
the size and extent of the ischemic area at risk, the
severity of ischemia, and prognosis.11, 13–15
Changes in the Initial Portion of the QRS
In the chronic phase of myocardial infarction, Q
waves are regarded as a sign of irreversible necro-
sis. However, about 50% of patients presenting
within 1 hour of onset of STE-ACS already haveQ waves in the leads with STE, especially in the
anterior leads.14These Q waves may be transient
and not necessarily represent irreversible damage.
It is believed that intense ischemia may cause a
transient loss of electrical activity in the region
at risk (“myocardial concussion”). Thus, Q waves
on presentation may reflect either irreversible
damage and/or a large ischemic zone, and thus
portend a large final infarction.14On the other
hand, in inferior STE-ACS preexisting Q waves may
disappear during acute ischemia—the Q waves may
be “pulled up” by the injury current—and reappear
during reperfusion.14
Changes in the Terminal Portion of the
QRS
Severe transmural ischemia affects the terminal
portion of the QRS. This is manifested as reduction
or abolition of the S wave in leads with terminal S
wave and a J/R wave ratio of 50% or more in leads
with terminal R-wave configuration (Fig. 1).11, 14
Patients with significant terminal QRS distortion
(Sclarovsky–Birnbaum grade III of ischemia) have
more severe ischemia, less myocardial salvage
despite successful recanalization of the epicardial
coronary arteries and poorer prognosis, compared
to patients with STE-ACS without terminal QRS
distortion (Sclarovsky–Birnbaum grade II).16, 17
A.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACSr9
Figure 5. Inferior STE-ACS. There is ST elevation in the leads II, III, and aVF and reciprocal ST depression in the lead
aVL. ST depression in the leads V 1–V4indicates involvement of the lateral segment of the left ventricle.
ST Segment Deviation
STE in leads facing the ischemic zone is the
most recognized manifestation of acute transmural
ischemia. Ischemia due to left anterior descending
(LAD) coronary artery occlusion usually induces
STE in the precordial leads, mainly in leads V 2–V4.
In anterior STEMI, concomitant STE in leads I and
aVL and/or STD in the inferior leads (II, III, and
aVF) points to occlusion of the LAD proximal to the
first diagonal branch.11However, the sensitivity
of this sign is low, as in many cases with a long,
wrapping LAD, concomitant inferior wall ischemia
tends to oppose the changes in leads I and aVL
and cancel ST deviation in these and the inferior
leads.11
Both dominant left circumflex (LCx) and right
coronary artery (RCA) occlusion usually results
in STE in the inferior leads. Usually there is
reciprocal STD in lead aVL. However, in cases
with LCx occlusion proximal to the first obtuse
marginal branch, concomitant ischemia of the high
lateral zone may lead to cancellation of STD in
aVL or even to STE in this lead.11Involvement
of the lateral zone may lead to STD in leads
V1–V3/V4(Fig. 5). This is seen in infarction due
to LCx or mid to distal RCA occlusion.11Right
ventricular involvement due to proximal RCA
occlusion may cause STE in lead V 1, attenuation
of STD in leads V 2–V3and results in STE in
the right-sided precordial leads V 3R and V 4R.11
In relatively rare cases of AMI limited to the
lateral zone, there may be minimal or no STE inthe inferior leads and the ECG manifestation of
ischemia will be reciprocal STD in leads V 1–V3.11
In many patients, recording leads V 7–V9(posterior
chest leads) may reveal STE. According to the
guidelines, patients presenting with STD in leads
V1–V34or V 1–V43should be considered as having
STE-ACS equivalent and referred for emergent
revascularization. However, confusion still exists
concerning this pattern. According to the Universal
definition of MI, “STD in leads V 1–V3may be
suggestive of inferobasal myocardial ischaemia
(posterior infarction), especially when the terminal
T wave is positive (ST elevation equivalent),
however this is nonspecific.”2However, it has
been recently shown that in these cases, the
infarction is localized to the lateral segments, and
not to the basal inferior segment.18Therefore the
term “lateral” STEMI is more appropriate and it
confirms with the Universal Definitions of the
LV segments.19However, the mirror image of
the acute phase of STE-ACS (STE with positive T
waves) is STD with negative T waves; thus early
on most cases present with STD and negative T
waves.20It is unclear whether in cases with STD
extending beyond lead V 4(V5–V6) true lateral STE-
ACS equivalent can be excluded. Moreover, in
patients with right bundle branch block (RBBB),
STD in leads V 1–V3is common. There are no
criteria how to diagnosed or exclude acute lateral
STE-ACS equivalent in patients with complete or
incomplete RBBB.
Although it is commonly taught that the absolute
sum of or the number of leads with STE correlates
10rA.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACS
with the size of the ischemic area at risk, this is
not always the truth. It should be remembered
that the various ECG leads record the vector
of the global activation of the heart toward
and away of the electrode and not local events.
Concomitant ischemia of opposing segments may
lead to cancellation of ST deviation in leads facing
these segments. For example, occlusion of a short
LAD before the first diagonal branch will cause STE
in leads I and aVL. However, due to concomitant
ischemia of the inferior segments in patients with
proximal occlusion of a wrapping LAD (that may
cause STD in leads I and aVL), STE may not be
present in these leads.11, 14
Changes in the T and U Waves
The first ECG manifestation of acute transmural
ischemia is an increase in the amplitude of the
T waves.21In most cases, this change is rapidly
followed by STE.15However, a small percentage of
patients may not develop significant ST-segment
deviation. This pattern is seen in patients with
chronic subtotal occlusion of the artery who have
developed rich collateral circulation.22The pattern
is difficult to recognize, as there are large variations
in the amplitude of the T waves in the various leads
among normal patients. Moreover, factors other
than ischemia (for example, serum potassium)
affect the T-wave amplitude. Occasionally, by
comparing to previous ECGs tall peaked T waves
can be recognized in a patient with compatible
symptoms. It should be remembered that isolated
tall peaked T waves without STE is not considered
as an indication for emergent reperfusion therapy.
Occasionally patients present with STE and
inversion of the terminal portion of the T waves.
The significance of this pattern is unclear. Early
inversion of the terminal part of the T waves,
along with a decrease in STE, is considered as
an ECG sign of reperfusion.14, 23However, it is
unclear whether one can assume that the culprit
artery is already recanalized in patients presenting
with STE and negative T waves and not send the
patient for emergent reperfusion therapy. It should
be remembered that the guidelines recommend
emergent reperfusion therapy in all patients with
compatible symptoms that started within 12 hours
of presentation (whether or not symptoms have
resolved) who have STE (the morphology of the
T waves is not mentioned).3, 4Inversion of the U waves may also be detected
during acute ischemia. However, these changes are
not so prominent and it is unclear whether they can
be used to guide therapy.
NON-ST ELEVATION ACUTE
CORONARY SYNDROME
As abovementioned, in many patients with
NSTE-ACS, ischemia is intermittent. By the time
of presentation many patients do not have ongoing
active ischemia. Therefore, in many patients the
ECG changes are minimal or reflect a reperfusion
state (inversion of the terminal portion of the T
waves or nonspecific T changes without significant
ST-segment deviation). However, during active
ischemia, ECG changes, including ST-segment
deviation and changes in the T- and U-wave mor-
phology may be detected. Therefore, it is important
to note whether the ECG was recorded while
the patient was asymptomatic or symptomatic.
Serial ECG recording during symptoms and after
their resolution may reveal subtle changes that
otherwise could not be recognized.
Acute subendocardial ischemia due to partial
reduction of flow and/or increase of demand
causes STD in the leads facing the involved zone.
Some clinicians tend to present the 12-lead ECG
as 24-leads, adding the mirror image of each
conventional lead.24With this approach any STD
can be depicted as STE. However, this does not
transform the patient into having STE-ACS, as
STE-ACS is a paradigm of an occlusion of an
epicardial coronary artery with ongoing transmural
ischemia (see above). It is yet to be shown whether
emergent reperfusion therapy is beneficial and
cost-effective in patients with isolated STE in the
mirror leads (isolated STD in the conventional
leads).
Acute subendocardial ischemia also affects the T-
wave morphology. STD with tall peaked positive T
waves is now being recognized as a sign of regional
subendocardial ischemia.15, 25, 26The European
STEMI guidelines recommend repeat ECGs or STE
monitoring in patients with (prominent) hyper-
acute T waves, which may precede STE.4On the
other hand, it seems that STD in the anterolateral
leads (V 4–V6) along with negative T waves is
associated with worse prognosis than STD with
positive T waves in these leads.27
A.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACSr11
Figure 6. Up-sloping ST depressions in the leads V 3–V5with prominent, positive T waves. The patient had an occluded
left circumﬂex coronary artery.
It has been suggested that the morphology of
the T wave may assist in differentiating between
anterior subendocardial ischemia (due to subtotal
LAD occlusion) and lateral transmural ischemia
(due to LCx or RCA occlusion) (Fig. 6). However,
it should be remembered that T-wave morphology
changes over time and with reperfusion. In many
instances the T wave is biphasic (either above
the isoelectric line initially with terminal negative
portion or initially negative with terminal positive
deflection). Different investigators used different
definitions for positive or negative T waves, some
used the area under the curve to define whether
it is positive or negative and some concentrated on
the terminal part of the T wave. Also, many authors
did not describe their definition of the T wave.
Several distinct ECG patterns seen in patients
with NSTE-ACS have been characterized:
1. T-wave inversion with isoelectric ST segments
or minor ST deviation: Overall, in NSTE-ACS,
isolated T-wave inversion is not considered
an ominous sign. Flat/ mild isolated T-wave
inversion, especially in leads with prominent R
waves, is usually seen after symptoms resolve
and is considered a sign of reperfusion.
It is well documented, that in ACS patients, who
present with deep isolated T-wave inversion in V 1
to V 3/V4(the “Wellens’ sign”), a critical stenosis of
the LAD coronary artery is found on angiography28
(Fig. 7). By definition, these cases are considered as
NSTE-ACS, but in fact they typically represent anevolutionary pattern of STEMI with spontaneous
or therapy-induced ST resolution. Guidelines do
not recommend immediate invasive evaluation of
these patients.15, 28However, these cases have to
be controlled carefully, because even though this
pattern is seen mainly after symptoms resolve,
reocclusion may occur with the appearance of
positive T waves or even STE Thus, this pattern
(deep negative T wave in V 1to V 3–V4), may be
potentially considered as a “spontaneously reper-
fused” anterior STE-ACS. Nevertheless, currently
there is no indication for instituting reperfusion
therapy within 60 minutes of arrival, as for classical
STE-ACS.
2. Up-sloping STD with positive tall T waves: Up-
sloping STD with positive T waves is commonly
seen in persons during tachycardia, even in
persons without coronary artery disease and is
usually not considered as indicative of myocar-
dial ischemia. However, the same pattern may
be seen in patients with NSTE-ACS at slower
heart rates and is increasingly recognized as a
sign of regional subendocardial ischemia.25It
has been suggested that when present in the
precordial leads, this pattern points to subtotal
or total occlusion of the LAD with resulting
subendocardial ischemia.26However, a similar
pattern has been described in patients with
LCx lesions (Fig. 6).15It should be remembered
that this pattern may be unstable and may
evolve to STE if the culprit artery progresses
from subtotal to total occlusion or if there
12rA.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACS
Figure 7. The “Wellens’ sign”: inverted T waves in the precordial leads, maximally in V 3–V4. Also leads I, II, and aVF
show T-wave inversions.
Figure 8. Circumferential subendocardial ischemia: widespread ( ≥6 leads) ST depressions with inverted T waves
maximally in leads V 4–V5and ST elevation in the lead aVR.
are changes in the collateral circulation.29
As patients with ACS might present with
reactive tachycardia, and ischemia can be
induced because of tachycardia, differentiation
between a “normal” up-sloping STD secondary
to tachycardia and regional subendocardial
ischemia is important. However, a threshold
for heart rate to distinguish between these two
entities has not been set.
3. Diffuse STD in the inferior and anterolateral
leads associated with ST elevation in lead aVR:
Widespread STD in ≥6 leads, often associated
with inverted T waves and STE in lead aVR
during episodes of chest pain is a mani-
festation of diffuse subendocardial ischemia
caused by left main-, left main equivalent-,or severe three vessel disease- related is-
chemia (Fig. 8).15The ECG may be normal
or show only T-wave inversion when the
patient is asymptomatic. These patients are at
extremely high risk for developing cardiogenic
shock and/or ventricular fibrillation and urgent
coronary angiography has been increasingly
recommended for these patients.15In the
guidelines, “left main coronary obstruction—
lead aVR STE and lateral STD,” is defined
as STD >0.1 mV in 8 or more surface leads
coupled with STE in aVR and/or V 1in an
otherwise unremarkable ECG. The authors
state that this ECG pattern suggests ischemia
due to multivessel or left main coronary
obstruction, particularly if the patient presents
A.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACSr13
Figure 9. ST elevations in the leads V 1–V2and aVR with widespread ST depressions. ECG signs of left ventricular
hypertrophy: deep S waves in the right and high R waves in the left precordial leads and in leads I, II, III, and aVF.
with hemodynamic compromise. When diffuse
STD is present, but the T waves are positive,
the prognosis is less ominous.15, 25, 27, 30, 31A
similar pattern of diffuse STD with STE in
lead aVR is often seen in patients with left
ventricular hypertrophy with repolarization
change and in patients with cardiomyopathy
or intraventricular conduction defects (Fig. 9).
In these patients, the ECG is abnormal at
baseline; however, with tachycardia or ele-
vated afterload, the magnitude of ST deviation
may increase. The usefulness of this pattern
for predicting left main, left main equivalent
acute ischemia in patients with abnormal
baseline ECG has not been established. Some
authors have suggested not loading patients
presenting with this particular ECG pattern
with P2Y12 adenosine diphosphate-receptor
antagonists before coronary angiography, as a
large number of these patients may need urgent
coronary artery bypass surgery.
In conclusion, the ECG gives snapshot informa-
tion about the electrical activation of the heart,
which may be affected by active ischemia. Thus,
ECG interpretation provides indirect information
about the presence, extent, and severity of
myocardial ischemia. At times, the changes are
typical and clear. In other instances, changesare subtle and might be recognized only when
ECG recording is repeated after changes in the
severity of symptoms (worsening or resolution of
symptoms). ECG interpretation is an essential part
of the initial evaluation of patients with symptoms
suspected to be related to myocardial ischemia
(pain, shortness of breath, dizziness, etc.), along
with focused history and physical examination.
Availability of prior ECG tracing and repeated ECG
enhances the accuracy of reading. Patients with
compatible symptoms and STE should be referred
for emergent reperfusion therapy (preferentially by
primary PCI). On the other hand, certain patterns
of NSTE-ACS may indicate high-risk and more
aggressive approach.
REFERENCES
1. Fibrinolytic Therapy Trialists’ (FTT) Collaborative Group.
Indications for fibrinolytic therapy in suspected acute
myocardial infarction: Collaborative overview of early
mortality and major morbidity results from all randomised
trials of more than 1000 patients. Lancet 1994;343:311–322.
2. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Third universal
definition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol
2012;60:1581–1598.
3. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation
myocardial infarction: A report of the american college
of cardiology Foundation/American heart association task
force on practice guidelines. Circulation 2013;127:e362–
425.
14rA.N.E.rJanuary 2014rVol. 19, No. 1rBirnbaum, et al.rECG Classiﬁcation in ACS
4. Task Force on the management of ST-segment elevation
acute myocardial infarction of the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC), Steg PG, James SK, et al. ESC guidelines
for the management of acute myocardial infarction in
patients presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart
J 2012;33:2569–2619.
5. Huang HD, Birnbaum Y. ST elevation: Differentiation be-
tween ST elevation myocardial infarction and nonischemic
ST elevation. J Electrocardiol 2011;44:494.e1,494.e12.
6. Wang K, Asinger RW, Marriott HJ. ST-segment elevation in
conditions other than acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J
Med 2003;349:2128–2135.
7. Larson DM, Menssen KM, Sharkey SW, et al. “False-
positive” cardiac catheterization laboratory activation
among patients with suspected ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction. JAMA 2007;298:2754–2760.
8. Sejersten M, Sillesen M, Hansen PR, et al. Effect on
treatment delay of prehospital teletransmission of 12-lead
electrocardiogram to a cardiologist for immediate triage and
direct referral of patients with ST-segment elevation acute
myocardial infarction to primary percutaneous coronary
intervention. Am J Cardiol 2008;101:941–946.
9. Tran V, Huang HD, Diez JG, et al. Differentiating ST-
elevation myocardial infarction from nonischemic ST-
elevation in patients with chest pain. Am J Cardiol
2011;108:1096–1101.
10. Rokos IC, French WJ, Mattu A, et al. Appropriate
cardiac cath lab activation: Optimizing electrocardiogram
interpretation and clinical decision-making for acute ST-
elevation myocardial infarction. Am Heart J 2010;160:995–
1003.
11. Atar S, Barbagelata A, Birnbaum Y. Electrocardiographic
diagnosis of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Cardiol
Clin 2006;24:343–365.
12. Dowdy L, Wagner GS, Birnbaum Y, et al. Aborted
infarction: The ultimate myocardial salvage. Am Heart J
2004;147:390–394.
13. Bayes de Luna A, Wagner G, Birnbaum Y, et al. A
new terminology for left ventricular walls and location
of myocardial infarcts that present Q wave based on
the standard of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: A
statement for healthcare professionals from a committee
appointed by the international society for holter and non-
invasive electrocardiography. Circulation 2006;114:1755–
1760.
14. Birnbaum Y, Ware DL. Electrocardiogram of acute ST-
elevation myocardial infarction: The significance of the
various “scores.” J Electrocardiol 2005;38:113–118.
15. Nikus K, Pahlm O, Wagner G, et al. Electrocardiographic
classification of acute coronary syndromes: A review by a
committee of the international society for holter and non-
invasive electrocardiology. J Electrocardiol 2010;43:91–103.
16. Billgren T, Birnbaum Y, Sgarbossa EB, et al. Refinement
and interobserver agreement for the electrocardiographic
Sclarovsky-Birnbaum ischemia grading system. J Electro-
cardiol 2004;37:149–156.
17. Sejersten M, Birnbaum Y, Ripa RS, et al. Influences of elec-
trocardiographic ischaemia grades and symptom duration
on outcomes in patients with acute myocardial infarction
treated with thrombolysis versus primary percutaneous
coronary intervention: Results from the DANAMI-2 trial.
Heart 2006;92:1577–1582.18. Cino JM, Pujadas S, Carreras F, et al. Utility of contrast-
enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CE-CMR) to
assess how likely is an infarct to produce a typical ECG
pattern. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 2006;8:335–344.
19. Cerqueira MD, Weissman NJ, Dilsizian V, et al. Stan-
dardized myocardial segmentation and nomenclature for
tomographic imaging of the heart. A statement for health-
care professionals from the cardiac imaging committee of
the council on clinical cardiology of the american heart
association. Circulation 2002;105:539–542.
20. Porter A, Vaturi M, Adler Y, et al. Are there differences
among patients with inferior acute myocardial infarction
with ST depression in leads V2 and V3 and positive versus
negative T waves in these leads on admission? Cardiology
1998;90:295–298.
21. Dressler W, Roesler H. High T waves in the earliest stage
of myocardial infarction. Am Heart J 1947;34:627–646.
22. Sagie A, Sclarovsky S, Strasberg B, et al. Acute anterior wall
myocardial infarction presenting with positive T waves and
without ST segment shift. electrocardiographic features and
angiographic correlation. Chest 1989;95:1211–1215.
23. Atar S, Barbagelata A, Birnbaum Y. Electrocardiographic
markers of reperfusion in ST-elevation myocardial infarc-
tion. Cardiol Clin 2006;24:367–376.
24. Wagner GS, Pahlm-Webb U, Pahlm O. Use of the 24-
lead “standard” electrocardiogram to identify the site of
acute coronary occlusion. A review paper. J Electrocardiol
2008;41:238–244.
25. Sclarovsky S, Rechavia E, Strasberg B, et al. Unstable
angina: ST segment depression with positive versus negative
T wave deflections–clinical course, ECG evolution, and
angiographic correlation. Am Heart J 1988;116:933–941.
26. Verouden NJ, Koch KT, Peters RJ, et al. Persistent
precordial “hyperacute” T-waves signify proximal left
anterior descending artery occlusion. Heart 2009;95:1701–
1706.
27. Atar S, Fu Y, Wagner GS, et al. Usefulness of ST depression
with T-wave inversion in leads V(4) to V(6) for predicting
one-year mortality in non-ST-elevation acute coronary
syndrome (from the electrocardiographic analysis of the
global use of strategies to open occluded coronary arteries
IIB trial). Am J Cardiol 2007;99:934–938.
28. de Zwaan C, Bar FW, Wellens HJ. Characteristic electrocar-
diographic pattern indicating a critical stenosis high in left
anterior descending coronary artery in patients admitted
because of impending myocardial infarction. Am Heart J
1982;103:730–736.
29. Birnbaum Y, Zhou S, Wagner GS. New considerations of
ST segment “elevation” and “depression” and accompanying
T wave configuration in acute coronary syndromes. J
Electrocardiol 2011;44:1–6.
30. Nikus KC, Eskola MJ, Virtanen VK, et al. ST-depression
with negative T waves in leads V4-V5–a marker of severe
coronary artery disease in non-ST elevation acute coronary
syndrome: A prospective study of angina at rest, with
troponin, clinical, electrocardiographic, and angiographic
correlation. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol 2004;9:207–
214.
31. Nikus KC, Sclarovsky S, Huhtala H, et al. Electrocardio-
graphic presentation of global ischemia in acute coronary
syndrome predicts poor outcome. Ann Med 2012;44:494–
502.
